Aero 14 Fan Control Registers.md, before:

# Fan and other control register values for the Aero 14Kv8
This file briefly describes the fan control registers and some others 
of the embedded controller (EC) of the Gigabyte Aero 14Kv8 Laptop 
(the Aero 14 model with Core i7-8750H processor).

*ALL OF THIS INFORMATION IS UNOFFICIAl AND WITHOUT WARRANTY.*

Most of this information is based on the work of Jason Ertel (https://github.com/jertel)
for an older Gigabyte model which I checked against the Aero 14Kv8.

The fan information is also based on what I understood by analyzing the EC registers.

None of this official information and I ask you to please be careful when manipulating
EC register values, especially before applying these values to other laptop models.

The register explanations below have the following format
 RR.B = value


* RR: stands for the register address of the EC - for example 0C
* .B: stands for one bit in this register, counting the bits from 0 to 7. If the bit reference is missing then the value refers to the whole byte and not just to a single bit
* value: stands for the value. If the address is for a single bit then the value can of course only be 0 or 1, if the address is for a whole byte then the value can be from 00 to FF. 

All numbers are hex numbers, e.g. 0C stands for register 0x0C.

## Normal fan mode 
This is the default fan mode where the fan is always spinning at minimum speed 
even if the CPU and GPU have low temperatures. 

The default mode is active if all the special mode bits (i.e., 08.6 and 0C.4 and 0D.0) are set to 0.

Register states for normal mode:
```
 08.6=0 (quiet mode off)
 0C.4=0 (gaming mode off)
 0D.0=0 (custom mode off)
```

## Quiet fan mode 
In this mode the fan will be off completely when the CPU and GPU are cool enough.
*Important:* This mode will also reduce CPU speed by preventing the CPU from using turbo frequencies, whereby the CPU will be *much* cooler but also slower.

Register states for quiet mode:
```
 08.6=1 (quiet mode on)
 0D.0=0 (custom mode off)
 0C.4=0 (gaming mode off)
```
 
## Gaming fan mode
In this mode the fan is always spinning at minimum speetd even if the CPU  and GPU
have low temperatures and the fan will switch to higher speeds more quickly.
 
Register states for gaming mode:
```
 08.6=0 (quiet mode off)
 0D.0=0 (custom mode off)
 0C.4=1 (gaming mode on)
```

## Custom fan mode 'auto maximum'
In this mode the fan is always spinning at minimum speed even if the CPU  and GPU
have low temperatures. If there are higher temperatures then the fan will not go 
above a certain maximum speed (instead, the components will be hotter and will 
eventually do thermal throttling). 

Register states for custom auto-maximum mode:
```
 06.4=0 (custom mode type: auto-maximum) 
 08.6=0 (quiet mode off)
 0C.4=0 (gaming mode off)
 0D.0=1 (custom mode on)
```

The registers B0 and B1 contain the maximum speed for the fan. 
Both registers must be set to identical values.

The mapping between hex values for the registers and percent in fan speed are as follows
* 44 -> 30%
* 50 -> 35%
* 5B -> 40%
* 67 -> 45%
* 72 -> 50%
* 7D -> 55%
* 89 -> 60%
* 94 -> 65%
* A0 -> 70%
* AB -> 75%
* B7 -> 80%
* C2 -> 85%
* CE -> 90%
* D9 -> 95%
* E5 -> 100%


So to set the fan to 50% maximum speed one would have to set the following register values
```
 06.4=0
 08.6=0
 0C.4=0
 0D.0=1
 B0=72
 B1=72
```

Warning: do not set values below 30%! The fan-speeds seem to be controlled with pulse-width modulation; it is not safe to use values below 30%!


## Custom fan mode 'fixed mode'
This mode sets the fans to a constant speed, independent of the temperature.

Register states for custom fixed maximum mode:
```
 06.4=1 (custom mode type: fixed speed) 
 08.6=0 (quiet mode off)
 0C.4=0 (gaming mode off)
 0D.0=1 (custom mode on)
```


As for the previous mode, the fan speed is controlled with registers B0 and B1. 
Again, it is dangerous to use values below 30%.

The value 00 is accepted and turns the fans off completely but this may not be 
safe because your hardware could overheat so it seems like a very bad idea unless
someone writes some kind of thermal monitor that controls the fans directly by
regularly updating the fixed fan speed based on its own temperature curve.

To set the fan to 50% fixed speed one would have to set the following register values
```
 06.4=1
 08.6=0
 0C.4=0
 0D.0=1
 B0=72
 B1=72
```


## Custom fan mode 'deep control'
The Gigabyte "Smart Manager" software also has a "deep control" mode where one can draw a fan speed curve 
to set the desired fan speeds in relation to different temperatures.

This mode seems to be controlled through bit 0D.7

The register flags which activate this mode are as follows:
```
 06.4=1 (not sure if the value of this bit matters or not if 0D.7 is set to 1)
 08.6=0 (quiet mode off)
 0C.4=0 (gaming mode off)
 0D.0=1 (custom mode on)
 0D.7=1 (deep control mode on)
```

It is not clear how and where the custom fan control curve is stored.

## Keyboard backlight
The keyboard backlight is controlled by register D7.
(This can also be controlled via the keyboard by pressing FN+Space)

It has three possible values
* 00 -> Backlight off
* 01 -> Backlight level 1
* 02 -> Backlight level 2 (bright)

E.g. setting `D7=02` turns the keyboard backlight to the brighter of the two levels.

## Control Bluetooth
Bluetooth is controlled by bit 01.7

I.e. setting `01.7=1` turns bluetooth on and setting `01.7=0` turns bluetooth off.

## Wifi
Wifi is controlled by bit 02.6
(This can also be controlled via the keyboard by pressing FN+F2)

I.e. setting `02.6=1` turns wifi on and setting `02.6=0` turns wifi off.

## Disable Screen
Screen can be turned off through bit 09.03.
(This can also be controlled via the keyboard by pressing FN+F6)

I.e. setting `09.3=1` turns the build-in screen off and setting `09.1=0` turns it back on.

## Touchpad
Touchpad activation is controlled by bit 01.7

I.e. setting `03.5=0` turns the touchpad off and setting `03.5=1` turns it back on.


## Webcam
Webcam availability is controlled by bit 01.6

I.e. setting `01.6=0` turns the webcam off such that it is unavailable to applications and setting `01.6=1` turns it back on.

## Charging Mode
There are different charging modes (Default, Express, Quality, Custom)

Default mode is enabled by setting the following register values:
* 0F.2=0
* C6.0=0
* A9=0x61

Express Charge Mode seems to be enabled by setting the following register values (not sure if additional register values are needed):
* 0F.2=1
* C6.0=0
* A9=0x61

Custom mode is enabled by setting the following registers:
* 0F.2 = 1
* C6.0 = 1
* A9 = [Maximum value up to which to charge]. Register A9 must be set to the maximum percent value up to which the charging should be done. The value is encoded as hex value, e.g.: 0x64 -> 100%, 0x5A -> 90%, 0x55 -> 85%, 0x50 -> 80%, 0x46 -> 70%, 0x3C -> 60%)

Custom mode limits the maximum amount up to which the battery should be charged. By charging the battery to less than 100% the battery will not age as quickly because with Lithium-Ion batteries, the last few percent of the charge will cause stronger wear than the earlier portion of the charge.

Commit message:

Add documentation about read registers for fan speed

Aero 14 Fan Control Registers.md, after:

# Fan and other control register values for the Aero 14Kv8
This file briefly describes the fan control registers and some others 
of the embedded controller
 (EC) of the Gigabyte Aero 14Kv8 Laptop 
(the Aero 14 model with Core i7-8750H processor).

*ALL OF THIS INFORMATION IS UNOFFICIAl AND WITHOUT WARRANTY.*

Most of this information is based on the work of Jason Ertel (https://github.com/jertel)
for an older Gigabyte model which I checked against the Aero 14Kv8.

The fan information is also based on what I understood by analyzing the EC registers.

None of this official information and I ask you to please be careful when manipulating
EC register values, especially before applying these values to other laptop models.

The register explanations below have the following format
 RR.B = value


* RR: stands for the register address of the EC - for example 0C
* .B: stands for one bit in this register, counting the bits from 0 to 7. If the bit reference is missing then the value refers to the whole byte and not just to a single bit
* value: stands for the value. If the address is for a single bit then the value can of course only be 0 or 1, if the address is for a whole byte then the value can be from 00 to FF. 

All numbers are hex numbers, e.g. 0C stands for register 0x0C.

## Normal fan mode 
This is the default fan mode where the fan is always spinning at minimum speed 
even if the CPU and GPU have low temperatures. 

The default mode is active if all the special mode bits (i.e., 08.6 and 0C.4 and 0D.0) are set to 0.

Register states for normal mode:
```
 08.6=0 (quiet mode off)
 0C.4=0 (gaming mode off)
 0D.0=0 (custom mode off)
```

## Quiet fan mode 
In this mode the fan will be off completely when the CPU and GPU are cool enough.
*Important:* This mode will also reduce CPU speed by preventing the CPU from using turbo frequencies, whereby the CPU will be *much* cooler but also slower.

Register states for quiet mode:
```
 08.6=1 (quiet mode on)
 0D.0=0 (custom mode off)
 0C.4=0 (gaming mode off)
```
 
## Gaming fan mode
In this mode the fan is always spinning at minimum speetd even if the CPU  and GPU
have low temperatures and the fan will switch to higher speeds more quickly.
 
Register states for gaming mode:
```
 08.6=0 (quiet mode off)
 0D.0=0 (custom mode off)
 0C.4=1 (gaming mode on)
```

## Custom fan mode 'auto maximum'
In this mode the fan is always spinning at minimum speed even if the CPU  and GPU
have low temperatures. If there are higher temperatures then the fan will not go 
above a certain maximum speed (instead, the components will be hotter and will 
eventually do thermal throttling). 

Register states for custom auto-maximum mode:
```
 06.4=0 (custom mode type: auto-maximum) 
 08.6=0 (quiet mode off)
 0C.4=0 (gaming mode off)
 0D.0=1 (custom mode on)
```

The registers B0 and B1 contain the maximum speed for the fan. 
Both registers must be set to identical values.

The mapping between hex values for the registers and percent in fan speed are as follows
* 44 -> 30%
* 50 -> 35%
* 5B -> 40%
* 67 -> 45%
* 72 -> 50%
* 7D -> 55%
* 89 -> 60%
* 94 -> 65%
* A0 -> 70%
* AB -> 75%
* B7 -> 80%
* C2 -> 85%
* CE -> 90%
* D9 -> 95%
* E5 -> 100%


So to set the fan to 50% maximum speed one would have to set the following register values
```
 06.4=0
 08.6=0
 0C.4=0
 0D.0=1
 B0=72
 B1=72
```

Warning: do not set values below 30%! The fan-speeds seem to be controlled with pulse-width modulation; it is not safe to use values below 30%!


## Custom fan mode 'fixed mode'
This mode sets the fans to a constant speed, independent of the temperature.

Register states for custom fixed maximum mode:
```
 06.4=1 (custom mode type: fixed speed) 
 08.6=0 (quiet mode off)
 0C.4=0 (gaming mode off)
 0D.0=1 (custom mode on)
```


As for the previous mode, the fan speed is controlled with registers B0 and B1. 
Again, it is dangerous to use values below 30%.

The value 00 is accepted and turns the fans off completely but this may not be 
safe because your hardware could overheat so it seems like a very bad idea unless
someone writes some kind of thermal monitor that controls the fans directly by
regularly updating the fixed fan speed based on its own temperature curve.

To set the fan to 50% fixed speed one would have to set the following register values
```
 06.4=1
 08.6=0
 0C.4=0
 0D.0=1
 B0=72
 B1=72
```


## Custom fan mode 'deep control'
The Gigabyte "Smart Manager" software also has a "deep control" mode where one can draw a fan speed curve 
to set the desired fan speeds in relation to different temperatures.

This mode seems to be controlled through bit 0D.7

The register flags which activate this mode are as follows:
```
 06.4=1 (not sure if the value of this bit matters or not if 0D.7 is set to 1)
 08.6=0 (quiet mode off)
 0C.4=0 (gaming mode off)
 0D.0=1 (custom mode on)
 0D.7=1 (deep control mode on)
```

It is not clear how and where the custom fan control curve is stored.


## Current Fan Speed
The current fan speed can be read from register 0xFC (current speed of the CPU fan) and register 0xFE (current speed of the GPU fan).
For both registers have a value range from 0 if the fan is standing still up to 22 if the fan is runnign at maximum speed.

## Keyboard backlight
The keyboard backlight is controlled by register D7.
(This can also be controlled via the keyboard by pressing FN+Space)

It has three possible values
* 00 -> Backlight off
* 01 -> Backlight level 1
* 02 -> Backlight level 2 (bright)

E.g. setting `D7=02` turns the keyboard backlight to the brighter of the two levels.

## Control Bluetooth
Bluetooth is controlled by bit 01.7

I.e. setting `01.7=1` turns bluetooth on and setting `01.7=0` turns bluetooth off.

## Wifi
Wifi is controlled by bit 02.6
(This can also be controlled via the keyboard by pressing FN+F2)

I.e. setting `02.6=1` turns wifi on and setting `02.6=0` turns wifi off.

## Disable Screen
Screen can be turned off through bit 09.03.
(This can also be controlled via the keyboard by pressing FN+F6)

I.e. setting `09.3=1` turns the build-in screen off and setting `09.1=0` turns it back on.

## Touchpad
Touchpad activation is controlled by bit 01.7

I.e. setting `03.5=0` turns the touchpad off and setting `03.5=1` turns it back on.


## Webcam
Webcam availability is controlled by bit 01.6

I.e. setting `01.6=0` turns the webcam off such that it is unavailable to applications and setting `01.6=1` turns it back on.

## Charging Mode
There are different charging modes (Default, Express, Quality, Custom)

Default mode is enabled by setting the following register values:
* 0F.2=0
* C6.0=0
* A9=0x61

Express Charge Mode seems to be enabled by setting the following register values (not sure if additional register values are needed):
* 0F.2=1
* C6.0=0
* A9=0x61

Custom mode is enabled by setting the following registers:
* 0F.2 = 1
* C6.0 = 1
* A9 = [Maximum value up to which to charge]. Register A9 must be set to the maximum percent value up to which the charging should be done. The value is encoded as hex value, e.g.: 0x64 -> 100%, 0x5A -> 90%, 0x55 -> 85%, 0x50 -> 80%, 0x46 -> 70%, 0x3C -> 60%

Custom mode limits the maximum amount up to which the battery should be charged. By charging the battery to less than 100% the battery will not age as quickly because with Lithium-Ion batteries, the last few percent of the charge will cause stronger wear than the earlier portion of the charge.
